---
title: Right
author: rvivek
layout: post
permalink: /right/
categories:
  - startups
tags:
  - notes
  - right
---
We&#8217;ve done a bunch of mistakes while building the company but there are certain things that we did right which I&#8217;ll blindfoldly recommend every startup to do because it has clearly worked for us 100%.

[1] Get a sincere office manager. At first it might seem like very little work for a full-time role. But an office manager position is like buying insurance. Only when the need arises, the true value is felt. If you&#8217;re running a company that has > 5 employees with 50+ customers, I bet you&#8217;ll feel the need at least twice or thrice a week.

[2] Buy a big TT table with good racquets. Working in a startup is very tiring that you definitely need a 30-min break in between to refresh yourself.

[3] Get a powerful laptop to all the engineers that can comfortably run a VM, chrome with 10 tabs and a music player. Buy [matrox][1] and ensure the development environment is [really powerful][2]. It increases productivity by a huge factor.

[4] Plan one day in a week to go out with the entire team &#8211; can be movie or lunch or anything that&#8217;s fun. Pick a slightly less busy day and get out.

[5] Get a cook who can provide at least two good meals a day. It&#8217;s okay if the cook costs 1.5x for a superior quality food, especially breakfast.

[6] Have a daily scrum for 20 mins on a time that&#8217;s convenient for everyone. Not only does it ensure everyone&#8217;s on the same page but also makes you work on something concrete. You know you&#8217;re being less productive when the scrum updates are very boring and generic. Fix the problem.

[7] If you&#8217;re a first time founder, get an advisor who will actually spend time with you and not just for name dropping. The advisor should be someone who has built a big company from scratch. And it is very very hard to find someone with those credentials. We were lucky! [Mark][3] is such an amazing advisor to us and we meet every week for 1.5 hours discussing the most critical issues that has to be fixed and how to build a great company.

&nbsp;

 [1]: http://www.amazon.com/Matrox-DualHead2Go-Digital-Edition-D2G-A2D-IF/dp/B000QRTHX8/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1343609979&sr=8-1&keywords=matrox+dualhead2go
 [2]: http://linode.interviewstreet.com/rohan.jpeg
 [3]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mark_Jung