---
layout: post
title: Designing products, lessons learned
wip: true
---

h1. {{ page.title }}

p(meta). 04 Apr 2013

When I first started RethinkDB I was absolutely terrible at designing _products_. I didn't need to be -- I just didn't know better. Here's a list of most important lessons I learned about product design.

h3. Importance of school

Never build a product without a corresponding field. (http://www.lettersofnote.com/2012/06/if-im-not-writer-then-im-nothing.html)

h3. README first / reason to exist

Figure out a sales pitch, then build the product to match the pitch. Not the other way around. If you can't solve someone's problem *today* with version one, there won't be a "later".

h3. Depth first vs breadth first

Newbies do it depth first. Experts do it breadth first.

h3. Differentiation vs neutralization

Learn it and live it. For feature X there are only two questions that matter -- will they buy *because* of X, will they *not* buy because of X? Different doesn't mean differentiated.

h3. Products sell inspite of issues

They don't sell because there are no issues.

h3. Fashion vs principle

Iambic pentameter can be packaged into a Shakespearean play, or into a hip hop song. Pick the right packaging for the time and the audience. Have the courage to stand for principles, but don't be afraid of fashion. Embrace it.

h3. Microscopes and immediate usefulness

Why will people use the product right now.

h3. Telescopes and keeping the dream alive

How will the product advance the human race? Use technology to modify the human condition.

