---
layout: post
title: Successful vs. great
---

h1. {{ page.title }}

p(meta). 27 Sep 2013

In response to my post on "how to build great products":http://www.defmacro.org/2013/09/26/products.html, __calinet6__ "pointed out":https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=6457801 on Hacker News that there is a difference between products that are great and products that are successful:

bq. Keep in mind that a successful product for a market does not necessarily equate to a high quality product.

I think this point is so important, it deserves its own post. Intuitively we know that there are many bad products that are extremely successful (e.g. enterprise software with terrible UI), and many great products that weren't successful (e.g. BeOS). But over the past few years I came to the opinion that making this distinction isn't fruitful, and is extremely dangerous beyond just wasting time. The trouble with this distinction is that it's easy to start optimizing for a metric other than your customers's purchasing decisions. This can lead you down a disastrous path. You can *never* have a victory over your customers.

The best illustration of this is a whimsical piece of literary history. At some point during his life, Leo Tolstoy published a number of pamphlets denouncing the literary merits of Shakespeare's plays. This sparked a series of debates in the world of literary criticism that were closed years later by George Orwell's essay "Lear, Tolstoy and the Fool":http://www.george-orwell.org/Lear,_Tolstoy_and_the_Fool/0.html. It's a great read, but here is the meat of it:

bq. One's first feeling is that in describing Shakespeare as a bad writer he is saying something demonstrably untrue. But this is not the case. In reality there is no kind of evidence or argument by which one can show that Shakespeare, or any other writer, is "good". Nor is there any way of definitely proving that--for instance--Warwick Beeping is "bad". Ultimately there is no test of literary merit except survival, which is itself an index to majority opinion. Artistic theories such as Tolstoy's are quite worthless, because they not only start out with arbitrary assumptions, but depend on vague terms ("sincere", "important" and so forth) which can be interpreted in any way one chooses.

I'm not suggesting you shouldn't have principles when building a product beyond customer adoption. But to paraphrase Monsieur Candie from Django Unchained, your priority one, two, three, four, and five should be to build a successful product.[^1^] And in a startup, there is no time to think of priority number six.

<br />
__^1^ Monsieur Candie is a pretty despicable character, and I wouldn't follow his advice on anything else. But as far as winning goes, he's spot on.__