---
layout: post
title: Opinionated and wrong
wip: true
---

h1. {{ page.title }}

p(meta). 22 Oct 2013

bq. I’m convinced that no one can amount to a damn in the arts if he becomes sweetly reasonable, seeing all sides of a picture, forgiving all sins.
-- Kurt Vonnegut

Everyone I know in the startup world who is worth their salt has strong opinions on a wide range of subjects.

Deadlines are necessary to ship successful software projects. Software projects are unpredictable so do away with deadlines. Raise as little money as possible to get you to the next milestone. The best way to build a company is to raise as much money as possible. PaaS is the future because there is no money in support and licensing. PaaS has terrible economics and it's best to charge for support and licensing instead.

I encounter strong opinions like these all the time, in others and in myself. It's good, because strong opinions are necessary. You must have strong opinions to decide between hundreds of available technologies, make progress in heated product debates, and make business decisions quickly when time is a factor. But there is another aspect to the company building equation. It's not enough to be opinionated. You have to be opinionated and "right":http://www.amazon.com/Values-Careers-Homepage/b?ie=UTF8&node=239365011, at least most of the time.

h2. Asking questions

In the course of my work I find myself having strong opinions on people management, fundraising, market dynamics, product management, marketing, sales, engineering, even personal psychology. I try to be direct about it to avoid wasting people's time. "I have a strong opinion on X and I disagree with your view." But whenever I find myself having a strong opinion, I  try hard to make a habit of asking myself three questions:

* How did I come to form this opinion?
* What criteria am I using to gauge whether my opinion is correct?
* What evidence would I need to convince myself I'm wrong?

It's difficult to consistently ask these questions. It requires a lot of energy and brutal self-honesty. The ego constantly plays tricks on me to keep me from being _too_ inquisitive. But asking these questions is clarifying. Most of the time I ask myself what evidence I would need to convince myself I'm wrong, I find myself stumbling through the answer. It becomes painfully clear I haven't thought things through. It's the first step to abandoning cookie-cutter reactions and getting to a *real* answer.

h2. Role models

Foo

h2. Avoiding dogma

bq. In studying a philosopher, the right attitude is neither reverence nor contempt, but first a kind of hypothetical sympathy, until it is possible to know what it feels like to believe in his theories, and only then a revival of the critical attitude, which should resemble, as far as possible, the state of mind of a person abandoning opinions which he hitherto held. Contempt interferes with the first part of this process, and reverence with the second.
-- Bertrand Russell

Foo.