---
layout: post
title: How to pick startup ideas
wip: true
---

h1. {{ page.title }}

p(meta). 02 Sep 2013

A startup is a living, breathing, working proof by induction. Your base case is a "product":http://www.defmacro.org/2013/09/26/products.html that a small subset of target customers love. Your inductive step is a superlinear distribution. You put @$X@ dollars in, and get @o(X)@ users out. The medium to support a superlinear distribution is a large market.

Of these three concepts -- product, market, and distribution, "the market is most important":http://blog.jedchristiansen.com/pmarcaarchive/the-pmarca-guide-to-startups-part-4-the-only. When you're building software with a baseline competent team, you can usually figure out how to build a great product and get to superlinear distribution when favorable market conditions fill your sails. Conversely, if the market conditions are poor, you'll never get past the base case. The inductive step doesn't work if you don't have a fertile medium for growth.

One dangerous piece of conventional wisdom is that a good team will find a way to pivot into a large market. Some great companies started this way, but it's a dangerous path. Once you raise a non-trivial amount of money, you'll have to convince investors and employees to switch direction. That takes time and energy, especially if you're a first-time entrepreneur and don't have a reputation. Wasted time means more dillution. Energy expenditure means a distraction. In the meantime, your competitors will have the momentum of starting from scratch. You'll be behind, dilluted, and demoralized. Sometimes you have no choice but to take this path, but it's best to avoid it at all costs.

The startup world is full of exceptions. Let exceptions save you when you run into trouble, but don't count on being exceptional. Exceptions are no excuse to avoid understanding market dynamics or failing to plan. Fortunately people have built up a lot of knowledge on how markets work. We only need to extend it to the startup world.

h3. Efficient market hypothesis

Efficient market hypothesis.

# __The need__ (the market) arises first, as a result of some social or technological change.
# Once the need arises, multiple products that attempt to satisfy it will quickly arise.
# The first product to actually satisfy the need wins. It doesn't matter how good it is. It doesn't matter what else it can or cannot do. It's only necessary for it to be good enough at satisfying the actual need.
# The upper bound of success is determined solely by the size of the market.

If you take these dynamics to their logical conclusion, you'll quickly realize that startups are __very__ tricky business. The moment a new market need arises, multiple teams will quickly discover the problem and start working on it. Furthermore, you have to assume that a few of those teams will be at least as good as you are, and will work just as fast. Most importantly, the moment __just one__ of these teams delivers a baseline acceptable product that solves the underlying problem, the game is over. How can you plan to win in these conditions? The recipe, I think, is to ask three simple questions: __why now?__, __how big?__, and __why us?__.

h3. Game of Thrones vs. Hunger Games

To illustrate this a little better, let's look at two products slightly outside of the startup world -- Game of Thrones, and Hunger Games (the screen versions, but you can also apply this to books). To a naive observer these franchises came out of nowhere. But if you look a little deeper, you'll see that the model I described here applies perfectly.

Both franchises came into being at roughly the same time. __Why now?__ Arguably for two reasons. The first is that mass market media has been on a trajectory towards more violence, more grit, and youger, more sexualized characters. The second reason is that movies like Lord of the Rings and Harry Potter paved the way for mass market acceptance of fantasy worlds. Combine these two factors, and you see a need -- an extremely violent, sexualized, mass market fantasy world for adults. Neither franchise would have been possible ten years ago. Both franchises will be old news ten years from now. But __right now__, these products are seeing phenomenal traction because there is a need, and it must be filled.

__How big__ is this market? Very, very big. Lord of the Rings big. Harry Potter big. Escapism for adults big (the key insight here is that adults want a few hours of escape from their lives even more than children do). We don't even need to do back of the napkin math big.

__Which one__ will win? As far as franchises go, my money is on Game of Thrones. Why? Because it doesn't equivocate. It's unafraid of picking a unique direction to satisfy a need and taking it to its logical conclusion. Hunger Games, on the other hand, __does__ equivocate. It's dealing with children, so the creators are worried about stepping too far. It's on the big screen, so it isn't as free to take a stance as Game of Thrones is on HBO. The violence isn't as gritty, and the sex is largely missing. Even the teenagers who Hunger Games was designed for want Game of Thrones instead. Hunger Games is good, but it isn't quite __good enough__ at satisfying the actual need. They tried to add bells and whistles like fancy costumes and CGI, but the market doesn't care. The market wants a fantasy world that's as violent and as sexualized as possible. It wants Game of Thrones.

