---
layout: post
title: Building magical products
wip: true
---

h1. {{ page.title }}

p(meta). 02 Sep 2013

The best article I know of on building a magical product for a massive market is the one on "reaching product/market fit":http://blog.jedchristiansen.com/pmarcaarchive/the-pmarca-guide-to-startups-part-4-the-only by Marc Andreessen. It's an excellent piece of advice, but by its own admission, it opens way more questions than it answers. If you know what you're looking for, it can help immensely. If you don't, it leaves you profoundly stuck.

My startup is going through this process now. We've got things __nearly__ figured out, but at the same time we're not quite there, not quite over the line. This places me in a unique position to talk about this problem. I'm not a complete newbie so I can talk about it with some authority, but I also didn't have a major success yet, so I don't have the benefit of hindsight and years of pattern matching experience.

So, from the perspective of someone who's smack in the middle of trying to catch the wave, how __does__ one reach product/market fit?

h3. Market dynamics

Despite its terseness, Marc's post accomplishes something most business books do not -- it covers pretty much all the dynamics of how products and markets interact. Let's summarize them here:

# __The need__ (the market) arises first, as a result of some social or technological change.[^1^]
# Once the need arises, multiple products that attempt to satisfy it will quickly arise.
# The first product to actually satisfy the need wins. It doesn't matter how good it is. It doesn't matter what else it can or cannot do. It's only necessary for it to be good enough at satisfying the actual need.[^2^]
# The upper bound of success is determined solely by the size of the market.

If you take these dynamics to their logical conclusion, you'll quickly realize that startups are __very__ tricky business. The moment a new market need arises, multiple teams will quickly discover the problem and start working on it. Furthermore, you have to assume that a few of those teams will be at least as good as you are, and will work just as fast.[^3^] Most importantly, the moment __just one__ of these teams delivers a baseline acceptable product that solves the underlying problem, the game is over. How can you plan to win in these conditions? The recipe, I think, is to ask three simple questions: __why now?__, __how big?__, and __why us?__.

h3. Game of Thrones vs. Hunger Games

To illustrate this a little better, let's look at two products slightly outside of the startup world -- Game of Thrones, and Hunger Games (the screen versions, but you can also apply this to books). To a naive observer these franchises came out of nowhere. But if you look a little deeper, you'll see that the model I described here applies perfectly.

Both franchises came into being at roughly the same time. __Why now?__ Arguably for two reasons. The first is that mass market media has been on a trajectory towards more violence, more grit, and youger, more sexualized characters. The second reason is that movies like Lord of the Rings and Harry Potter paved the way for mass market acceptance of fantasy worlds. Combine these two factors, and you see a need -- an extremely violent, sexualized, mass market fantasy world for adults. Neither franchise would have been possible ten years ago. Both franchises will be old news ten years from now. But __right now__, these products are seeing phenomenal traction because there is a need, and it must be filled.

__How big__ is this market? Very, very big. Lord of the Rings big. Harry Potter big. Escapism for adults big (the key insight here is that adults want a few hours of escape from their lives even more than children do). We don't even need to do back of the napkin math big.

__Which one__ will win? As far as franchises go, my money is on Game of Thrones. Why? Because it doesn't equivocate. It's unafraid of picking a unique direction to satisfy a need and taking it to its logical conclusion. Hunger Games, on the other hand, __does__ equivocate. It's dealing with children, so the creators are worried about stepping too far. It's on the big screen, so it isn't as free to take a stance as Game of Thrones is on HBO. The violence isn't as gritty, and the sex is largely missing. Even the teenagers who Hunger Games was designed for want Game of Thrones instead.[^4^] Hunger Games is good, but it isn't quite __good enough__ at satisfying the actual need. They tried to add bells and whistles like fancy costumes and CGI, but the market doesn't care. The market wants a fantasy world that's as violent and as sexualized as possible. It wants Game of Thrones.

That's all there is to it. Doing this type of analysis is half the battle. Unfortunately, being objective while applying it to your own startup without the benefit of hindsight turns out to be really, really hard.

h3. Startup ideas

A good startup idea is always a combination of a set of trends, and a hypothesis that follows from these trends. For example, in case of TV shows above, the two trends are a tendency of mass market media to be more violent and more sexualized, and mass market acceptance of fantasy worlds. The hypothesis is that there is a market for an extremely violent, extremely sexualized fantasy world.

There are two approaches you can take to generating startup ideas given startup market dynamics. The first is to try and discover the market need before everyone else does. The second is to enter a market after a few teams have already started working on the problem, but find a unique insight that others haven't found yet. Both approaches are doable, and many companies have succeeded in each of these two categories. However, unless you have an extraordinary piece of inside information (unlikely), I'd always prefer to take the second approach.

Arriving at a viable hypothesis from a set of trends is really, really hard. Calvin Coolidge once said that if you see ten troubles coming down the road, you can be sure that nine will run into a ditch before they reach you. Predictions work that way too. If you take a laundry list of trends and try and come up with a hundred predictions, ninety nine of them will fall into a ditch. Most human thinking is dogmatic, but predictions require you to abandon dogma by definition. Thinking in the absence of dogma is __incredibly__ hard. You can do a little bit of it and be right, but if you go too far and make predictions on top of predictions, you'll almost certainly diverge from the real world. Some thinkers can pull it off, but if you're learning how to build startups from this post, you almost certainly can't.

That leaves us with the second option -- enter a recently discovered market that already has a few teams working in it. The reason why this works is that there is an enormous gap between a hypothesis and a finished product. You can end up with wildly diverging products depending on how you choose to bridge that gap. Let's say you accept the hypothesis that the market wants a violent, sexualized fantasy world. There are still dozens of big decisions you have to make. Do you create a world based on sword and sorcery, or a world with a more science fiction bent? If you pick science fiction, how far into the future do you want to go? Do you start with a prospering world on its way to apocalypse, or with a post-apocalyptic world about to rise from the ashes? The decisions you make here allow for enormous opportunities for unique solutions and craftsmanship. If you assume that every team will execute equally well, it's still possible to find a unique, finely grained insight to guide your decisions that allows you to outrun the competition. Doing this well is very hard, but it's half the work of having to find a unique market need before others (since you're reducing the number of predictions that have to turn out to be right).

Finding a newly discovered market need is surprisingly easy. You just have to know someone who sees a lot of teams. For example Y Combinator is perfect to get a sense of what people are working on. If you know a VC who sees a lot of teams and is willing to share trends, that works too. Even if you don't know anybody, all you have to do is browse TechCrunch for a week. Lump companies into categories, and after a few days a coherent picture will start to emerge. You can then pick categories that interest you and start making educated guesses. Who are the perceived leaders in each category? What are they doing? What fine grained assumptions are they making? Is there a unique insight about the market everyone else seems to be missing?

h3. From hypothesis to a product

When a market need is found, various teams jump in and make their decisions, staking out different claims on the decision tree. If you can find a unique territory based on some key piece of insight, you'll be poised to win. The first step to doing that is to make three buckets to categorize features:

* *As much as possible* -- most of your resources and creative power will be spent on features in this bucket (MBAs call this __differentiation__). These are the features that make customers want to buy your product.
* *As little as possible* (or __as much as necessary__) -- you'll do minimum passable amount of work on any feature that ends up in this bucket (MBAs call this __neutralization__). These features don't make customers buy your product, but prevent them from buying if they're missing (which means you should do minimum amount of work you can get away with).
* *Unnecessary* -- you won't implement any feature that ends up in this bucket.

Your job is to come up with a simple function that takes any feature you can ever imagine for your product and place it in one of these categories. This function will depend on who you are, what you want to build, and what you believe the market wants. Most importantly, it should categorize features in a drastically different way than any other product in the market. Good functions are simple, can be explained to different people (investors, employees, customers), and leave little room for guesswork.



-----

^1^ Some products are so transformative, they themselves act as the necessary social or technological change to unlock a pent up need. But it's rare enough that I wouldn't count on it.
^2^ Depending on the market the second product might also do ok (but a lot worse). The third product almost certainly won't matter.
^3^ In practice things often turn out to be slightly easier. Some time usually passes before other teams discover the market, and building great products is so hard almost everyone will screw it up. But you can't depend on that -- if things happen that way, you can thank your gods for this extraordinary piece of good luck. In the meantime, you have to plan for the worst.
^4^ The market is so huge, that both franchies will probably do ok. There might even be enough space for a third one.

