---
title: 3 metrics
author: rvivek
layout: post
permalink: /3-metrics/
categories:
  - Uncategorized
---
A company = f(customers,product,team)

*Customers love great products that solves a pain  
Great products are built by great teams  
Great teams in turn attract great people*

There are only 3 metrics that are essential to make it happen and it&#8217;s the same for both customers and the team. 

**For customers/product**  
a. On-boarding: Is the first experience of the app impressive and successful? (define success based on a parameter that makes sense for the product)

b. Engagement & retention (they go hand-in-hand): Is the product becoming a habit for the customer? Again, you can define &#8220;habit&#8221;. Once customers are engaged with the product, the retention metric automatically grows. Your product becomes sticky.

c. Virality: Are customers able to refer other people to the product? This is by far the best marketing strategy ever. 

**For the team**  
a. On-boarding: Is the experience on the first day/week so stunning that it looks like the person is high on caffeine and excited to work?

b. Engagement & retention (they go hand-in-hand): Is everyone in the team excited to come to work and not have monday/tue/wed blues? Are they really participating in discussion about product and strategy as opposed to just finishing off todo list? A highly engaging environment where everyone&#8217;s ideas matter is such a good atmosphere to be in.

c. Virality: Is everyone in your team able to convince or refer their friends to the company? 

*Customers love great products that solves a pain  
Great products are built by great teams  
Great teams in turn attract great people*