---
layout: post
title: How to pitch your startup to investors
wip: true
---

h1. {{ page.title }}

p(meta). 23 Sep 2013

"This sounds really interesting. Let's circle back in a few days, we'd love to follow your progress."

We heard this over, and over, and over again from investors when we first started raising capital for our company. After weeks of fundraising and not getting any checks we went back to advisors and asked for feedback on our pitch. They listened carefully, and mostly said the same thing. "You've got to tell a compelling story." We thought we _were_ telling a compelling story. In retrospect, I'm surprised how well our early audiences managed to walk the delicate line between cringing and falling asleep.

So I read all I could on pitching and story telling. I read "Save the cat":http://www.amazon.com/Save-Last-Book-Screenwriting-Youll/dp/1932907009, and "The Hero with a Thousand Faces":http://www.amazon.com/Thousand-Faces-Collected-Joseph-Campbell/dp/1577315936, and Dan Harmon's "notes on story structure":http://channel101.wikia.com/wiki/Story_Structure_101:_Super_Basic_Shit, and Peter Theil's "startup notes":http://blakemasters.com/peter-thiels-cs183-startup, and Guy Kawasaki's "pitch deck advice":http://www.marsdd.com/mars-library/how-to-create-a-pitch-deck-for-investors/, and Pixar's "rules of storytelling":https://mastersreview.com/tips-pixars-22-rules-of-storytelling/. I read, watched, and listened to a myriad of resources. I even studied Ali G's parody of an "investor pitch":https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=48TR0vUPQCs. Hey, it doesn't hurt to learn what _not_ to do.

Then we tried again.

This time it worked. Eventually we went on to raise over $12M in funding, so there is some evidence we did _something_ right. Here are the lessons we learned and the template we settled on. As always, it's one man's opinion. Don't send angry e-mails if you use this structure and tank your fundraising round (or if you're an investor and you start getting terrible pitches that follow this post).

h2. Don't take pitching advice from investors

Before we begin, you should internalize a really important lesson on pitching. There is a lot of investor advice on how to pitch to investors, and it's a natural place to start learning. Study these resources carefully, but then proceed at your own risk.

A great pitch is about convincing and exciting people, so you can't craft it in a vacuum. You'll be presenting to a lot of people, and incorporating their feedback. To do that well, you have to separate good feedback from bad feedback, which brings us to a rather important sociological truth: humans are great at noticing problems but terrible at proposing workable solutions. Just look at global warming, ObamaCare, or building good UIs. "Why don't you do the obviously correct thing, instead of the obviously wrong thing?" If only the world were that simple.

Good user experience designers have known for years that customers will get confused by bad design within seconds, but then offer suggestions that make a bad problem worse. Designers listen to feedback to notice problems, but largely ignore suggestions on how to fix them. Figuring out how to solve problems is the designer's job.

Investors are the customers for your pitch. They usually know a good pitch when they see one, and they definitely know a bad pitch (boy are they familiar with bad pitches), but they have no idea how to take a bad pitch and convert it to a good one. That's up to you.

Pay close attention to body language and facial expressions. Notice when people frown (they don't believe something), or zone out (you've lost them), or lean in at the edge of their seat (finally, you got something right!) Take careful notes, fix the bad parts, and double down on the good parts. But be very careful about taking specific advice on how to actually improve the pitch. Incorporating suggestions verbatum will usually make a bad pitch worse.

h2. All good stories are the same

For all the infinite variety of storytelling, the crux of every story ever told is exactly the same. To quote Pixar's rules of storytelling:

bq. Once upon a time there was ___. Every day, ___. One day ___. Because of that, ___. Because of that, ___. Until finally ___.

A good story is about change. The knights of the round table were hanging out in King Arthur's castle, doing whatever it is that the knights of the round table do. One day a monster appeared. Because of that the knights went out and did their knight thing. Until finally, they defeated the monster, having learned a lot in the process and transforming the organizational bereaucracy of the King's castle to deal with appearance of monsters more swiftly and cost effectively in the future.

(If you're a high art aficionado, I know there are stories that push the boundary of the medium and don't follow this structure. I'm ignoring those, because presumably your goal is to raise capital for your company, not to win a Nobel Prize in literature.)

The "Pearl Poet":http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pearl_Poet knew what he was doing when he wrote about "Sir Gawan":http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sir_Gawain_and_the_Green_Knight. You can do far worse then follow his lead when structuring your investor pitch. So let's get started.

h2. The title slide

When you first walk into the room to present your company, investors are suspended in a state of uncertainty. They know nothing about you or your business. Perhaps you're building kitty mp3 players. Or perhaps you've invented a new triangular marketing scheme. They don't know.

Their uncertainty is your canvas. Because they have no information, you get to define reality for them, right there, in the first thirty seconds. Before you jump into your story you need to give people _some_ anchor to hold on to, a reference point to orient themselves. This reference point is the name of your company and a single terse sentence explaining what you do. Put that on the intro slide in big letters. Then say what you do:

"Hi, I'm so and so. I'm the founder of Kitty MP3. We make mp3 players shaped like kittys for teenage girls."

What you've just done in a mere few seconds is collapse a universe of possibilities into a single, tangible reality in people's minds. You've given them an enormous amount of information. They now roughly know who you are -- you're so and so. Your company is called Kitty MP3. You don't in fact sell triangular marketing schemes -- you sell mp3 players shaped like kittys. And your target market is teenage girls.

Once you've given people a reference point, they start wondering. Why has so and so, a budding entrepreneur, decided it's a good idea to dedicate years of his life to building a kitty mp3 player company? It's time to tell the story!

h2. Slide 1: old world in equillibrium

This slide is your story's setting -- the part before the appearance of the monster. Once upon a time there was ___. Every day, ___. Here you're explaining to people what the world looked like just a few months ago, before the monster appeared and compelled you to dedicate the next few years of your life to work on your company.

Perhaps people spend 1.2 trillion dollars every year on buying gas-guzzling, environmentally unfriendly vehicles. Perhaps they hand banks billions of dollars worth of wire transfer fees to send money to people who aren't within their immediate geographical vicinity. Or perhaps billions of people buy non-kitty shaped mp3 players.

If you do a good job on this slide, it shouldn't raise any objections. People do in fact spend 1.2 trillion dollars on vehicles with internal combustion engines. They do spend billions of dollars on wire transfer fees sending money to other people. They do buy non-kitty shaped mp3 players. You might have to answer a few questions if you're talking about a specialized space your investors aren't familiar with, but you shouldn't notice any resistance. You're just stating facts -- this is how the world works.

This slide shouldn't take more than a few minutes, shouldn't be controversial, and shouldn't be overly complicated. After you're done with it, you will have explained the setting. Now it's time to introduce the monster.

h2. Borrow from The Economist

There is one major difference between telling a story about Sir Gawan and pitching your startup to investors. Literary plots are explicated through characters and their actions. Fundraising stories are explicated through an inductive argument. Your base case is the actions of a real person or organization. Your induction step is strongly cited statistics.

Your fourteen year old sister Mary spends four hours a day using her non-kitty mp3 player -- half an hour on her way to school, and half an hour on her way back home. Then another three hours while she does her homework. There are upteen million girls like Mary in the U.S., and according to these three very credible sources, between 70-75% of them exhibit the same behavior.

It takes a bit of practice to learn how to tell stories like that, and the best way to pick up the lingo and structure quickly is to read a couple of issues of The Economist. Every analysis slide in your deck should resemble The Economist article. There are a few very good reasons why you want model these types of arguments after this venerable publication. The Economist correspondents are especially good at telling these types of stories. They do a great job of telling great stories by alternating between individual cases and statistics. They make the audience feel smart by teaching them something new, and they're good at making strong arguments without triggering people's baloney detectors. Incidentally, this is exactly the vibe you want to go for when pitching your startup.

More importantly, The Economist specifically targets affluent business audiences. The overwhelming majority of the investors you'll end pitching read it, and The Economist correspondents are used to business lingo. If you explicate the story using the same patterns, investors will be much more likely to accept your assertions. It's the easiest way to learn to talk the talk without going to business school.

h2. Slide 2: the world has changed

It's time to introduce the monster. This is the "One day ___" part of the story. It's also your company's hypothesis and the most important part of the pitch. If you do a good job, this slide will be bold, controversial, and extremely well researched. You're sharing an extraordinarily valuable, critical, and possibly secret insight. You're making your audience purview to information thus far available only to you. "The world is undergoing a subtle change that will have dramatic implications. Let me show you how."

You've noticed your sister Mary and her friends attach stickers of kittys onto their mp3 players. So you started digging. You've personally called a random sample of a hundred teenage girls, and discovered that 87% of them attach stickers of kittys to their mp3 players. You wanted to be sure, so you've commissioned an independent research organization to replicate the study. They've corroborated your findings.

So you dug even deeper. You've manufactured a few samples of kitty-shaped mp3 players and presented them to a random sample of teenage girls along with regular mp3 players. Amazingly, 97% of your subjects strongly preferred kitty mp3 players to a regular ones. This is an unprecedented finding. The prolifiration of mp3 players and kittys has just crossed into critical mass.

This part of the pitch should pack a tremendous punch, and should polarize your audiences. You want it to be so well researched that people question the hypothesis, not the data. You want them to wonder, question, and probe. Don't equivocate. You don't need everyone to agree with you -- this is what your company is about. They either choose to accept your hypothesis, or they do not.

h2. Slide 3: implications

Now you're getting to the end of your story. "Because of that, ___. Because of that, ___. Until finally ___." Don't expect people to arrive at conclusions themselves. Take them there. Everyone knows that when the monster appears, the knights of the round table end up slaying it. But it's still your job to tell the tale.

Explain that the market demands the innovation of kitty mp3 players. Explain how it will revolutionize the mp3 player industry, the kitty industry, and the daily lives of teenagers. Explain how this business has strong network effects and economies of scale. Make a well researched case that once this innovation gets to market, nobody will be able to catch up. By the end of this slide you want to leave people with a single question -- are you the one who'll get there first?

h2. Why this works

Foo

h2. Changing the world

Foo

h2. A compelling story does not a true story make

Foo

h2. Slide 4: company snapshot

By now you will have explained the premise behind your company and its implications. At this point one of three things will happen:

- Your audience doesn't accept your hypothesis
- Your audience falls in love with your hypothesis
- Your audience is intrigued with the hypothesis, but has to do more research

If they don't accept your hypothesis, it doesn't matter what you do next. Be polite, finish your pitch, and move on with your day. Treat it as an opportunity to practice.

The fun really begins if the audience falls in love with your hypothesis or is intrigued by it. If that happens, they'll need to answer a critical question -- are you the one to get there first? To answer this question investors need a lot of information. How far along is the company? Has the product shipped, or is it still in development? If it shipped, what does traction look like? Are you making money yet? How big is the team working on this? Where are you located? Who are the team members? What does the market look like? How do you plan to take it? How much are you raising?

With all the questions in the air, you can't just proceed with regular programming. It doesn't matter which topic you pick to talk about next -- people will be distracted with questions. Different people in the room will often want different answers first, and they'll have trouble paying attention to anything you're saying. The best way to proceed is to preempt the questions with a summary slide. This is a brief snapshot of the company -- four to five bullet points summarizing where you are and why you're in the room:

- Size and location of the team
- Addressible market size
- State of the product (shipped, beta, etc.)
- Traction and revenue metrics (both absolute numbers and percentage growth)
- How much you've raised to date, and how much you're raising now

"We're a team of four, all working out of a New York office. Two of us have sold companies before, and we're now tackling this five billion dollar kitty mp3 player opportunity. We shipped KittyPlay three months ago, and already sold $300k worth of product to six thousand teenage girls, on track to sell $500k more next month. We've raised a seed round of $500k, and want to offer you an opportunity to participate in our $5M series A."

This kind of summary reduces tension. You've briefly answered most of the basic questions. You've given people firm ground to stand on. They know who you are, where your company is, and why you're in the room. Now they're ready to sit back and hear the details. From now on, your pitch is all about execution. If you've done a good job, you've already convinced people you're pursuing a valuable opportunity. Now you have to convince them you're the most competent team in the world to capitalize on it.

h2. Your product is a commodity, and so are you

Foo

h2. Slide 5: market analysis

Foo

h2. Slide 6: competitive landscape

Foo

h2. Slide 7: the product

Foo

h2. Slide 8: go to market strategy

Foo

h2. Slide 9: use of funds

Foo

h2. Slide 10: call to action

Foo

h2. Appendix slides

Foo

h2. Investor ethnography

Foo

h2. Competing with everyone

Foo