---
layout: post
title: A guide for new engineering mananagers
wip: true
---

h1. {{ page.title }}

p(meta). 29 Sep 2013

Welcome to engineering management. It's fun, it's exhausting, it's rewarding, but most importantly it's new! What worked for you before won't work now. You'll have to acquire a whole new set of skills, and shed some bad habits in the process. Here is a short guide to get you started.

h2. Your primary responsibilities include:
<br />

# Attract, nurture, coach, and retain talent. Talk to engineers to tease out bubbling concerns, then fix them if you can. Fire bullies and underperformers.
# Be the tiebreaker when the development team can't reach consensus.
# Communicate to every engineer the next most important issue to work on.
# Be the information hub. Know what every engineer is working on, and help connect the dots that wouldn't otherwise get connected.
# Provide administrative support. Appraise, assign, and schedule bug tracker issues, coordinate releases, and make sure the bureaucratic machine keeps ticking.
# Enforce behavioral standards if people mistreat each other.

<h2 style="margin-left: -8px;"><br />Your primary responsibilities do not include:<br /><br /></h2>

#_ Personally fixing bugs and shipping features. You have to write code to remain an effective tiebreaker, but that's where your coding responsibilities end.
# Supervising the quality or volume of people's work. Software engineering isn't an assembly line. If you find yourself supervising too often, you haven't attracted the right people or given them the right incentives.

<h2 style="margin-left: -8px;"><br />Emotions, people, and culture<br /><br /></h2>

#_ Management happens to have prestige associated with it in our culture, but it's a skill like any other. Prestige is a fickle, arbitrary, and dangerous abstraction. It's also a huge distraction. Guard against believing you're any better than anyone else. The sooner you get over prestige, the sooner you can focus on doing your job well.
# If you feel something's wrong, you're probably right. Don't let anyone bully you into ignoring your feelings.
# If you find yourself blaming someone, you're probably wrong. Nobody wakes up and tries to do a bad job. 95% of the time you can resolve your feelings by just talking to people.
# Most people won't easily share their emotions. Have frequent informal conversations, and tease out everything that might be wrong. Then fix it if you can.
# Have the courage to say what everyone knows to be true but isn't saying. It's your job now.
# Have the courage to say what everyone should know but doesn't. It's your job too now too.
# Hire great people, then trust them completely. Evaluate performance on monthly basis, then fire if you have to. Don't evaluate people daily, it will drive everyone (including you) insane.
# Most intellectual arguments have strong emotional undercurrents. You'll be dramatically more efficient once you learn to figure out what those are.

<h2 style="margin-left: -8px;"><br />Tiebreaking and conflict<br /><br /></h2>

#_ Don't judge too quickly, you're right less often than you think. Even if you're sure you're right in any given case, wait until everyone's opinion is heard.
# Once everyone is heard, summarize all points of view so clearly that people say "Thanks, I wish I'd thought of putting it that way." List any points of agreement with each view, and state what you've learned from everyone. Then make your decision.
# Once you've made your decision, enforce it. Don't let the team waste time going in circles to placate disproportionally strong voices.
# Reopen the discussion if there is significant new information.
# When disagreement gets personal or people don't accept well-reasoned decisions, it's turned into conflict.
# Most conflict happens because people don't feel heard. Sit down with each person and ask them how they feel. Listen carefully. Then ask again. And again. Then summarize what they said back to them. Most of the time that will solve the problem.
# If the conflict persists after you've gone to reasonable lengths to hear everyone out and fix problems, it's time for a difficult conversation.

<h2 style="margin-left: -8px;"><br />Difficult conversations<br /><br /></h2>

#_ Have difficult conversations as soon as possible. Waiting will only make a bad situation worse.
# Never assume or jump to conclusions. Never demonize people in your mind. Never blame, yell or vilify.
# Use "non-violent communication":http://firstround.com/article/power-up-your-team-with-nonviolent-communication-principles. It smells like a fad, but it really works (I promise).
# Have the courage to state how you feel and what you need. People are drawn to other's vulnerability but repelled by their own. Vulnerability isn't weakness.
# Expect people to extend you the same courtesy. If someone makes you feel bad for stating your needs and feelings, it tells you more about them than about yourself.

<h2 style="margin-left: -8px;"><br />Rough edge<br /><br /></h2>

#_ People will push and prod to discover your boundaries. Knowing when to stand back and when to stand firm is half the battle.
# Occasionally someone will push too far. When they do, you have to show a rough edge or you'll lose all authority with your team.
# A firm "I'm not ok with that" is usually enough.
# Don't laugh things off if you don't feel like laughing them off. Have the courage to show your true emotions.
# If you have to firmly say "I'm not ok with that" too many times to the same person, it's your job to let them go.
# Believe in yourself. You can't lead a cavalry charge if you think you look funny on a horse.
