---
layout: post
title: Why work at a startup
wip: true
---

h1. {{ page.title }}

p(meta). 21 Jan 2014

Here is what the end of a typical startup interview looks like when you run into someone good:

bq. - Thank you for interviewing with us, I'll discuss with the team and get back to you by tonight. Do you have any questions for me?
- Yes, I have offers from Facebook and Google. Why should I work at your startup?

Ahh, the question from hell.

Side note to interviewees. This is a wonderful way to get back at startup founders for seven hours of technical torture. By all means, use this opportunity! But next time you ask this question, remember this post. To you, it's just a question. To them, it's an existential can of worms. "Does my startup have a good enough reason to exist? Am I a failure? Will I have to crawl back to mom and admit this whole Silicon Valley thing was a mistake?" You get the idea. Your question will cut deep. So please, be gentle!

But back to regular programming. You _are_ asking a very good question. Particularly because it's a good general question. Ignoring the specifics of a given company, is it _ever_ a good idea to work at a startup? Why or why not?

It turns out there is at least one reason to work at a startup, and it's a very strong reason indeed. But first, let's look at all the reasons why you _shouldn't_ work at a startup.

h2. Why not

First don't work at a startup if you want to get rich. According to YC numbers, the average value of a YC startup is $24M[1]. If you get in really early and get 1% of the company in equity, your expected value is $240K. Nothing to sneeze at, but not rags to riches either. If you're in it for the money, a better way might be to move into shady industries where the risk adjusted margins are higher, such as bank robberies or quantitative analysis on Wall St.

Second, don't work at a startup if you want to work on interesting problems. I know that company you're eyeing advertises swanky machine learning and computer vision problems that no man has ever solved before. In startup speak, that means doing chi-squared tests on a dataset that would fit into RAM of an average 1996 desktop computer and cobbling together a bunch of open source libraries to implement a REST API.

But wait, some startups _do_ work on interesting problems! I've heard of one where engineers actually do original computer vision research! Yes, startups like that do exist, and you don't want to touch them with a ten foot pole. Original computer vision research in a startup means never shipping an actual product, which means you can kiss your $240K exit bonus good bye. The odds of a startup shipping something, let alone something useful, are low enough. Don't join one where they're indistinguishable from zero. If you want to work on serious machine learning or computer vision problems, just go to grad school.

Third, don't work at a startup because you want to learn how to start a startup. There is no substitute for holding the reigns.

You want to learn from the founders. You'll likely be working with a guy or gal who's muddling their way through and are in no position to teach you anything.

h2. Why, then?

To learn the most valuable skill you'll ever learn in your career and can't learn anywhere else. The difference between action and motion.

[1] http://ycombinator.com/nums.html