---
layout: post
title: Are non-STEM majors worth it?
wip: true
---

h1. {{ page.title }}

p(meta). 28 Oct 2014

Much has been said about the higher education crisis. I've been in a position to hire people for a few years now, and as a hiring manager I want two things from new hires -- being able to get started right away, and being able to think critically about the world.

For example if I'm expanding my marketing organization, the market pressures no longer leave me with the luxury of spending months to teach new hires basic skills of the trade. I need them to be able to reach out to high-impact bloggers and conference organizers to promote the company, buy effective ads on relevant networks, and e-mail journalists to amplify media coverage. The only way to get good at these things is to do them, and a marketing major doesn't help with the doing. You can't build good intuition on how to buy effective ads until you actually buy ads and stare at the engagement numbers, and you won't be buying any ads in a college auditorium.

The second thing I need new hires to do is to be able to think critically about the world. Technology and markets are changing at a breakneck speed -- the way you buy ads today is completely different from how you bought them two years ago, and how you'll be buying them two years from now. Critical thinking is *really* hard -- you can't recognize how the world is changing by browsing Wikipedia or by learning about the marketing mix. You have to get accustomed to thinking deeply about the world, and the best way to do that is to be an heir to the riches of a scholarly tradition. Why didn't the Ottoman empire develop Feudalism? Why did the ancient Greeks stop short of developing quantitative analysis methods? Why didn't the inventors of the steam engine capture most of the value they created? Learning to think through the big questions about our past is the best way to recognize the shifting trends of the present, and a marketing degree is too shallow to develop this kind of thinking.

Colleges are feeling the squeeze, so they're trying to balance imparting the riches of a tradition with providing effective trade training. But the industry is too sophisticated -- colleges can't be effective trade schools, and they certainly can't be effective trade schools by implementing a few half measures. Instead, colleges should do three things.

First, they should stop trying to be all things to all people. It's hurting the students, it's hurting the industry, and it's hurting colleges themselves.

Second, they should go back to their roots of imparting the riches of a tradition, but reinvent themselves for the modern world. Instead of cramming students with information, they should introduce the big questions at the beginning of a semester, and invite students to suggest answers. Then, as they progress through the semester, they should cross out implausible answers, culminating with grading students on more refined answers once they've learned the necessary material and developed basic intuition and critical thinking skills.

Third, they should develop much more sophisticated industry ties and placement organizations to help students land internships throughout their undergraduate career. Internships in the industry must be an essential part of the curriculum, and colleges should embrace that in a much more comprehensive way.

In the meantime, students should opt for pure majors, work like hell to get a series of focused internships, and steer clear of middle of the road majors. It's much better to have a degree in Classics and a solid internship experience doing real marketing work than to get a degree in marketing. Higher education is more important than ever, but colleges must boldly adjust to the twenty first century. They can't succeed by implementing half measures to try and be all things to all people.

