---
title: learn
author: rvivek
layout: post
permalink: /learn/
categories:
  - Uncategorized
---
Some of the things I learnt.

  * Have a single brand for your company
  * Press releases always have bloated numbers except in a few cases
  * Be vocal about good feedback
  * Any bad feedback to your team member should be told immediately in private in as much honesty as possible
  * An absolutely great product is a must. Let&#8217;s not debate about it
  * Choose an office space that&#8217;s good and easy to reach. You&#8217;ll never find a space that everyone is happy about
  * Hire people because they believe in your mission not because you are backed by YC or a leading investor or that you&#8217;re just two blocks away from their house. It&#8217;s hard to screen this during the interview but try
  * Frugal is good and necessary but being stingy leads to bad output. Allocate $x per team member (I hate the word employee) in your budget and buy them the stuff they want
  * Keep investors updated.. always. If you aren&#8217;t disciplined to send a summary e-mail every month, keep sending ad hoc e-mails if you signup a customer or anything that&#8217;s worthwhile to share
  * Don&#8217;t worry about competitors. They can&#8217;t affect the pace at which you grow. Just keep growing
  * Referrals for hires are good but don&#8217;t attach a weight to the referrer while interviewing the person. It&#8217;ll skew the results. Interview him/her like how you&#8217;d for anyone else
  * Customer relationships are important. Signing them up is just a small step. Maintaining the relationship and making them successful is a big thing. Get someone dedicated to do that