---
layout: post
title: Leadership observations
wip: true
---

h1. {{ page.title }}

p(meta). 7 Sep 2014

There are already very good lists of startup lessons written by really talented, experienced people ("here":http://betashop.com/post/32913573235/90-things-ive-learned-from-founding-4-technology and "here":http://blog.samaltman.com/startup-advice). I'd like to add another one. I learned these lessons the hard way in the past four years. If you're starting a company, I hope you have an easier path.

h2. Purpose

bq. "He who has a why to live can bear with almost any how."
-- _Friedrich Nietzsche_

# Regardless of success or failure, it's a matter of time until your passion for operational details and prestige subsides, an alternative life presents itself, and you start asking yourself "why?" It might happen when you lose or gain a loved one, or it might happen on your deathbed, but it *will* happen.
# To live a fulfilling life you need a true north -- the answer to this why, a point in the emotional, intellectual, cultural, and empirical space you can use to calibrate your inner compass when it's in turmoil.
# The raw materials for your true north are your convictions and desires, forged in a crucible of competing feelings, ideas, people, and facts. It is one of the most difficult and rewarding processes in the human experience.
# A communicable true north allows you to attract allies, make decisions, develop a unique school of thought, and form a resilient organization.
# Without a true north you will be pulled in a thousand directions and killed by a thousand compromises.
# Not everyone will want to embark on your journey, and not everyone will want to stay till the end. You *will* lose people, so be sure your destination is worth it.
# Take good care of people who love and support you. What good is reaching a destination if you have nobody to share it with?

<h2 style="margin-left: -8px;"><br />People<br /><br /></h2>

#8 Humans under pressure are so unlike humans in regular life, you may as well forget all you know about them and treat them as a different animal altogether. They're completely unpredictable; vicious, magnanimous, fragile, resilient, dumb, brilliant, cowardly, bold. Sometimes all at once.
# As a leader you're under the most pressure. Forget all you know about yourself, and prepare to be *very* surprised.

