---
layout: post
title: X laws of market dynamics
wip: true
---

h1. {{ page.title }}

p(meta). 03 Oct 2014

When I started my company five years ago, I didn't know anything about how markets develop or what principles govern their ebb and flow. Eventually I went on to learn far more about the subject than I ever thought possible. It's five years later, but much of the information on market dynamics is still locked up in the minds of people who learned the ropes through trial and error. This post is a crash course I wish I had when I was getting started.

h2. Clusters
<br />

# Human advancement (in business, technology, art, sport, politics, and religion) happens in "clusters":http://www.lettersofnote.com/2012/06/if-im-not-writer-then-im-nothing.html. Scientists call these clusters __fields__, artists call them __schools of thought__, politicians call them __ideologies__; economists and business people call them __markets__. Nearly everything of value happens in these clusters, and almost nothing of value happens outside of them.
# 

<h2 style="margin-left: -8px;"><br />Don't<br /><br /></h2>

#_ Personally fix bugs and ship features. You have to write code to remain an effective tiebreaker, but that's where your coding responsibilities end.
# Supervise the quality and volume of people's work. Software engineering isn't an assembly line. If you find yourself supervising too often, you haven't attracted the right people or given them the right incentives.


<br />
__Thanks to Michael Glukhovsky, Michael Lucy, and Alex Taussig for reviewing this post.__

