---
layout: post
title: How to pick startup ideas
wip: true
---

h1. {{ page.title }}

p(meta). 02 Sep 2013

A startup is a living proof by induction. The base case is a product that a small subset of target customers love. The inductive step is superlinear distribution. You put some amount of dollars in, and get an asymptotically larger amount of users (and dollars) out. The medium to support superlinear distribution is a large, fertile market.

There is "art and science to building great products":/2013/09/26/products.html, and if you're perceptive and willing to work hard you can usually figure out the base case for almost any idea. Building something just one person will love isn't _that_ hard once you get the knack for it. And if your product satisfies one person, it will usually satisfy a dozen. The world is a big place.

The question is how to go from a dozen happy users to a hundred million in just a few years. When it comes to the inductive step, you can't make every idea work by a sheer force of will or puritan work ethic, any more than you can hit the moon with bow and arrow after years of diligent practice. Tenacity, determination, resourcefulness -- all are necessary but insufficient. If you want a moon shot, it's not enough to work hard. You have to work hard on the right problem.

So you need a method to generate startup ideas and separate promising problems from unpromising ones. One school of thought is that no such method could be devised, so you should just work on what interests you and see what sticks. I don't think so. I'm interested in Lisp compilers, and I know I could make one _someone_ will love. But it's obviously a bad startup idea. Following your dreams only works if they don't run counter to natural laws that govern how technology gets adopted. Let's examine these laws and see show they work.

h2. Defining a market

Foo

h2. Markets as chess boards

Like a game of chess, market dynamics are governed by a few simple rules that combine into endless complexity and require a lifetime of dedication to achieve mastery. But unlike chess, with markets you have a much richer control of your circumstances. You get to pick the timing and the location. You can survey thousands of boards with different initial setups and choose to play when you find one to your advantage. You can pick a board with dozens of existing opponents or with none at all. You don't even have to start playing at the beginning -- you can watch the boards for as long as you like and jump into any game at any time!

This brings us to our first important observation. __In startups, picking the right game is at least as important as playing well.__ Some very rare boards have a huge pot of gold at the end, an easy path to victory, and almost no competition. If you manage to pick such a board you don't have to be a particularly good player, you just have to be borderline compenent. Some other boards have a huge pot of gold at the end, a trecherous path to victory, and dozens of competitors trying to sabotage each other. Playing these boards requires an immense amount of skill and dedication.

But by far, most boards have very trecherous paths to victory and barely any money at the end. Some of these boards are empty. Others have dozens of competitors, fighting a brutal war for years to barely get anything at all! And this brings us to the second important observation. __If you pick a startup idea at random, you'll almost certainly end up on one of the difficult boards with no prize.__ And in fact, if you look around this is exactly what happens empirically. Restaurants and iPhone apps are especially cut-throat low margin businesses, and people end up starting those all the time.

So you want to pick a board with a large pot of gold, an easy path to victory, and preferably no opponents (or lots of old opponents who haven't realized the game has changed).

h2. Looking at a chessboad

Context and efficiency

h2. Generating ideas.

Dramatic improvement occurs when one or more persistent incremental trends cross a threshold and allow for a qualitative change.

Dropping battery prices + green tech becoming fashionable = luxury electric vehicles (Tesla).

- Divide and conquer. Amazon -> Gilt, Zappos, etc.
- Look at a hypergrowth company/technology. Determine what changed to make it possible. See if that change applies to other things. (AirBnB -> Lyft)
- Look at a hypergrowth company/technology. Assume it takes over the world. See what complementary company you can build. (Git -> GitHub, MongoDB -> MongoHQ)
- Look for moral values on the cusp of a big change. See if you can build a company around them (23andme, ashley madison [and most dating sites])
- Look at an expensive technology and see if you can make it assymptotically more accessible (sgi -> nvidia)
- Look at old, promising companies/technologies/ideas that never quite worked. See if something changes so you can make them work now. (Google, Oculus)
- Flipping the default (Snapchat)

h2. Evaluating ideas

Good markets seem small.

Good markets seem big.

Polarizing insight. 75% of pros and 99% of laymen shouldn't see the insight.

The why now test. Good markets will grow, with or without you.

Sustainable advantage. Who else can answer "how is this different?" In a good market, nobody will be able to.

Good markets are accessible to you.

